---
title: Class 03/01/21
position: 6
category: MATH 2114 - Linear Algebra
---

# Unit 3 Continued

## Basis of a Subspace

A Basis of a subspace *W* is a set $\vec{v}_1,...,\vec{v}_k$ of vectors such that 

1. Span($\vec{v}_1,...,\vec{v}_k$ ) = *W*
2. $\vec{v}_1,...,\vec{v}_k$  are linearly independent

*B* is a basis of *W* if

1. Span(*B*) = W
2. *B* is $l.i.$

### Theorem

Every vector z in *W* can be written in exactly one way as a linear combination of the vectors in a basis.

### Proof

Suppose $B =\vec{v}_1,...,\vec{v}_k$  is a basis of *W*. 

Suppose $\vec{z}=a_1\vec{v}_1+...+a_k\vec{v_k}$

Suppose $\vec{z}=b_1\vec{v}_1+...+b_k\vec{v_k}$

Subtract:

$0=(a_a-b_1)\vec{v}_1+...+(a_k-b_k)\vec{v_k}$

So:

$a_1-b_1=0 \rarr a_1=b_1$

$\vdots$

$a_k-b_k=0 \rarr a_k=b_k$

## The Reduction Algorithm

Suppose Span($\vec{v}_1,...,\vec{v}_k$) $=W$ if $\vec{v}_1,...,\vec{v}_k$ is not $l.i$. We can find one $\vec{v}_i$ that is a combination of the others. If we remove that vector from the set, the span does not change. Repeating this process until the set is $l.i$, we obtain a basis of *W*. 

## Extension Algorithm

Suppose $\vec{v}_1,...,\vec{v}_k$ are in *W* and they are linearly independent. Then the set can be extended to a basis of *W*.

### Example

Find a basis for $W =$ span($\vec{v}_1,\vec{v}_2,\vec{v}_3,\vec{v}_4$)  where
$$
\vec{v}_1=\begin{bmatrix}
1\\
2\\
3\\
\end{bmatrix}\\
\vec{v}_2=\begin{bmatrix}
3\\
4\\
4\\
\end{bmatrix}\\
\vec{v}_3=\begin{bmatrix}
-1\\
0\\
2\\
\end{bmatrix}\\
\vec{v}_4=\begin{bmatrix}
5\\
6\\
5\\
\end{bmatrix}\\
$$
Build a matrix with variables as columns:
$$
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 3 & -1 & 5\\
2 & 4 & 0 & 6\\
3 & 4 & 2 & 5\\
\end{bmatrix}\\
$$
Put in REF:
$$
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 3 & -1 & 5\\
0 & -2 & 2 & -4\\
0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\
\end{bmatrix}\\
$$
$\vec{v}_1$ and $\vec{v}_2$ are a basis for *W* because $\vec{v}_3$ and $\vec{v_4}$ are dependent.

The vectors corresponding to the columns of the REF containing leading entries form a basis for the span of the columns, which is called the column space: COL(*A*).

### Theorem

Any two basis of a subspace *W* have the same number of elements.

### Definition

The dimension of a subspace *W* is the number of elements in any base of *W*.



Let *A* be a matrix. Then DIM(COL(*A*)) = Rank(*A*)

### Proof

If we reduce *A* to a REF, the columns of *A* corresponding to the columns of the REF with leading entries, form a basis.

### To show Basis or not Basis

Put in REF, check rank.

## The Null Space

The Null space of a matrix *A* is the set of solutions of the system $A\vec{x}_1=0$:

If $A\vec{v} = \vec{0}$

And $A\vec{w}=\vec{0}$

Then $A(\vec{v}+\vec{w}) = A\vec{v} + A\vec{w} = \vec{0}+\vec{0} =0$



Suppose A is $m\times n$, then COL(*A*) is a subspace of of $\R^m$, and NULL(*A*) is a subspace of $\R^n$.

DIM(COL(*A*))+DIM(NULL(A))=n

Rank(*A*) = DIM(COL(*A*))

Nullity = DIM(NULL(*A*))